<h3><b>Mexico City Air Quality Index Analysis</b></h3>

In March 2016, the government in Mexico City introduced emergency measures to try and deal with supposedly very high levels of contaminants in the air.
At a first level, the measures involve including all cars in the 'Hoy No Circula' program; traditionally brand new cars and cars that pass emissions testing are excluded, however for the period running from 1st April - 30th June, all cars will be restricted for circulating one day per week as well as one Saturday per month.

Additionally, the authorities are able to declare additional emergency measures based upon air quality monitoring as well as weather-forecasts, whereby they:
*further reduce the number of cars on the roads by including additional cars in the Hoy No Circula program (based upon the last digit of the number plate)
*reduce the activity of gas stations, factories etc.

Many people have been surprised (and a little skeptical) of this sudden need for measures, and have been asking why all of the sudden this has become an issue.
This is an exploratory data analysis looking at historical data to understand how 'new' the problem really is.


<b>GETTING THE DATA</b>

There is a government-run website which publishes apprixmately hourly levels of contamination here: http://aire.df.gob.mx/default.php

On the website, there is a section where you can query data for particular contaminants for specific months, outputting the data in a standardized HTML table format. This seemed like an ideal candidate for quick a dirty webscraping which I implemented using BeautifulSoup and the Python's inbuilt Urllib library, and can be seen in more detail in the DataWrangling notebook.

However, subsequent analysis of the obtained data revealed that for most indices, I was only able to obtain data from 2015 and 2016. Luckily, a more detailed exploration of the website revealed another section where it is possible to download entire annual datasets in CSV format going back to 1986, such as:

*Hourly Air Quality Index
*Hourly Measurement for Specific Contaminants

<b>INITIAL ANALYSIS</b>

As a first step, I focused on the Air Quality Index measures going back to 2005, as these are the data that supposedly inform a daily decision as to whether impose additional measures or not (see above).

The city is split into 5 regions:

<ul>
<li>Center</li>
<li>North-East</li>
<li>North-West</li>
<li>South-East</li>
<li>South-West</li>
</ul>

and indices are reported hourly for:

<ul>
<li>Ozone (O3)</li>
<li>Sulphur Dioxide (SO2)</li>
<li>Nitorigen Dioxide (NO2)</li>
<li>Carbon Monoxide (CO)</li>
<li>Particulates smaller than 10 micro-meters (PM10)</li>
</ul>

The interpretation of the reportes indices should be as follows:

<ul>
<li>0-50 = Good</li>
<li>51-100 = Regular</li>
<li>101-150 = Bad</li>
<li>151-200 = Very Bad</li>
<li>>200 = Extremely Bad</li>
</ul>

Note: the responsible agency for air quality monitoring (Secretaria del Medio Ambiente) provides a lot of easily accessible data, as well as good analysis and graphics on their website. My own personal analysis is more of a side-project in order to practice specific data collection, analysis and visualization techniques.
